(upbeat music)
Alright, in this video,
we are gonna be talking about Reactive Streams
and how they relate to Spring Framework 5.
Now, the Reactive Streams API, the goal was to create
a standard asynchronous stream processing
with non-blocking back pressure.
So, all the reactive stuff that we've been talking about.
The initiative was started in 2013
by engineers from Netflix, Pivotal, and Lightbend
and Lightbend is formely Typesafe.
And just as an interesting tidbit,
Rod Johnson, the founder of Spring Framework,
actually worked on the Board of Directors for Typesafe.
I think at this point in time, he's moved on,
I'm not 100% sure on that, but I think he is pursuing
other things at this point in time,
but he was with Typesafe.
And Lightbend is now the company
that has been VC funded and they are supporting
the Scala language and Scala is some cool stuff.
And then the Reactive Streams API
is actually just a set of four interfaces
which define the API and then there's actually
a specification about the behavior we expect
and the implementation of those interfaces
but I'm not going to get into that.
And the 1.0 release was done in 2015
and what's notable is under JEP-266,
Reactive Streams is now gonna be part of the Java 9 JDK.
So, that will be a fully recognized feature inside of Java 9
and so that is going to be there in the future.
Now, there's a number of adoptions
and the landscape right now is changing quickly
because there's always new stuff coming out
and the Reactive community is becoming more and more active.
so we have Akka Streams and that's Scala, MongoDB,
Ratpack, Reactive Rabbit, which I have not
played with yet but I hope to.
Project Reactor, that's the Spring implementation.
RxJava, if I remember right,
that is from the folks at Netflix.
And all these support the Reactive Streams API,
so these different adaptions should, at least in theory,
play nicely together and work nicely together.
Now, like I said a moment ago,
the 1.0.0 release was done in 2015
and I am recording this in August 15th, 2017,
so not even the following week that the 1.0.1 release was done.
Now, in the that release, that's a minor release in the API,
the interface classes did not change at all.
It was more of a specification change of how they behave.
I think they clarified some things in there
but the interfaces have remained the same.
So, let's take a quick look at some of the interfaces.
We have a Publisher and this is gonna provide
a unbounded number of elements, so, that's our data stream.
And then we have a Subscriber, so this is going to consume
from a publisher, obviously.
Subscription, you can see that these interfaces
are pretty simple to use and a lot of times
our abstraction's gonna be really, really simple to use
and we'll be definitely looking at examples of these.
And then finally, processor, to give you an idea
on how all these fit together
and this is how the streams are processing.
So, publisher is going to be publishing events
which are gonna get consumed by a subscriber
and a subscriber is going to have
a subscription to a publisher.
And through that subscription,
the subscriber can give feedback on demand or backpressure.
So, hope you can start envisioning how this works.
We're gonna be definitely looking at
some live examples in the coding of this.
But this is how these interfaces fit together.
Now, in Spring MVC and Spring WebFLux,
the Reactive stuff is going to be
under the right hand side of the spring-webflux.
And what has happened inside the Spring Framework
is the Servlet Container, the Servlet API,
is not reactive, it is blocking.
So, Spring Framework guys created a whole new stack,
a whole new web framework,
with inside of Spring called spring-webflux.
Now, top of these, we're still gonna be using
the @Controller and @RequestMapping annotations
or a whole new functional API called Router Functions.
You can use either one of these
with spring-mvc or spring-webflux.
So, this is all handled by the framework.
You can use either stack whether you wanna be Reactive
or use traditional Servlet and there's really
nothing wrong with traditional Servlet.
It still works, I mean, it's still a very robust
programming API that we have to
deal with the web environment.
So, it's still inside of Spring Framework.
It's not mandatory to use, it's not bad to use
but for the Reactive functionality
when you are in these high volume streaming environments,
we do have this whole new Reactive Framework
with Spring WebFlux and we'll be
looking at that a lot closer.
Now, the Spring web MVC stuff does still support
the traditional Servlet container
but the WebFlux, we now have to option
of Tomcat, Jetty, Netty, or Undertow.
And these are different Reactive implementations
that we can work with.
Netty is probably the most robust option
but Tomcat is a little bit simpler
and widely, widely used.
So, your implementation to your needs can vary
but you do have options there.
And the Spring Framework will work with any of those.
Now, the next thing we need to talk about
inside the Spring Framework is the Spring Reactive Types.
So, there's two new reactive types
introduced with Spring Framework 5.
'Mono' is a publisher with zero or one elements in the
data stream and this is important to understand zero or one.
And then 'Flux' is zero or many
elements inside the data stream.
And I wanna point out that both of these types
implement the Reactive Streams Publisher interface.
And I expect that you can probably work with
just about any Publisher inside of
the Spring Framework web APIs but we are gonna be
focusing on using the Mono and Fluxes and using
these data types and setting up our Spring controllers now.
Now, what you're gonna see going forward in the class is
because of the way Spring, let me back up one slide.
Because of the way Spring set up things,
our Controller and RequestMapping, still there,
we still setup our controllers the same way,
but now we are gonna be working with these return types.
If we have a reactive data store like we do with Mongo
that reactive call will go through full stack
and that is our goal to get here.
But we need to define this terminology first.
In the next, upcoming videos we're gonna be
looking at examples of converting over the controllers
that we've been working with to start
leveraging these reactive types.